Once around the Earth's core.
I thought it was time we had a look at
what's going on deep in the core of our
own planet. We've spent enough time on
this channel talking about the cores of
other planets in our solar system and
beyond. So, let's have a look.
Well, we know there is a huge amount of
internal heat and that heat melts the
iron in the outer core, which flows as a
liquid and that flowing combined with
the spin of the Earth is generating a
dynamo effect creating the Earth's
magnetic field with all the effects that
come with that and the rising plumes of
heat bubbling up underneath the crust
spread the sea floor and shove the
continents around creating plate
tectonics and volcanoes [clears throat]
and all of those sorts of effects that
we have talked about in many of our
other videos on this subject.
Now, we have made measurements of the
total heat flow
in around 20,000 boreholes all over the
world and from measuring the temperature
at different depths, we can work out
that the heat is flowing from the core
out to space at a rate of 44 terawatts
of power.
The question then is where is all of
this coming from?
Well, let's have a look at the internals
once again. We have the inner core, a
huge ball of metal, iron and nickel
mostly, other metals mixed in as well,
kept solid by the immense pressure of
all the overlying layers.
And
the temperature is around 5,000
degrees
Kelvin, Celsius makes very little
difference.
And all of that trapped heat is trying
to
re-equilibrate,
get out to space and cool the thing off.
The laws of thermodynamics.
And it's doing so fairly slowly in
comparison to the overall time scales of
the Earth.
It's been around 4,500 million years,
and that trapped heat is still trying to
get out and cool the whole thing down.
As it's it flowing outwards, the inner
core is gradually cooling, and more more
material from the outer core is
solidifying onto it, so the inner core
is gradually growing. A process of
planetary differentiation
that has continued since the Earth was
formed.
The outer core,
under lower pressure, less overlying
material squeezing it, is able to melt
and create a fluid metal, liquid metal
layer that can flow and move around and
generate that magnetic field as it
spins.
And it is cooling as well,
with part of it condensing onto the
inner core, growing the inner core, as I
said.
Above that, we have the mantle.
Now, this is not metal. This is rocky
material, metal silicates and other
lighter elements.
And this is
considerably thicker, coming all the way
up to the very thin outer layers.
And a lower density, being made of rock,
that allows it to float over the dense
inner layers.
Again, differentiation
is gradually forcing the lower density
materials to the top and the higher
density materials to the center.
The outer crust is solidified rocks,
mostly silicates again, and is a very
thin layer around the outside divided
into two types, oceanic crust and
continental crust with the continental
crust generally being lower density and
able to float over the top of the higher
density ocean crust.
Now, when the planet was formed from the
solar nebula, the material that had
condensed mostly to form the sun but
also the other planets
there was a very very high degree of
radioactivity.
We think that the solar nebula was the
result of a previous supernova event and
supernovae are highly radioactive
creating all the elements that we see
around us in a nuclear fireball and that
then can gradually cooled, condensed to
form the sun, the other planets, but the
radioactive load out that the planets
were equipped with from day one was
enormous.
Nowadays, of course, 4,500 million years
later, almost all of the short-lived
radioisotopes, the highly active ones,
have decayed away and left us with the
longer lift lived ones that take a very
much longer time to gradually
fade away. So, we still have those
around us.
And it's the energy of that radioactive
decay that we need to take into account
adding to the overall heat budget from
the very energetic process of planet
formation where lots of material fell
together under gravity and collided and
released its kinetic energy and the
gravitational potential energy heating
the planet's core to a molten ball
from day one
plus all the decay of radioactivity that
has gone on from that day to this,
gradually decreasing as it fades away.
Now, one of the elements that is of
particular interest is, of course,
uranium.
Normally thought to be the
heaviest element naturally occurring on
Earth.
Uranium is what's known as a lithophile.
It likes rock.
Litho for rock.
And
this is because it prefers to bond with
oxygen and silicates. And so, it's
tended to end up in the Earth's mantle
rather than in the core. At least that
was the traditional story. Now, recent
evidence shows that uranium can happily
dissolve in
iron and nickel metal. And so, it may be
that there is some
uh uranium
finding its way into the core of our
planet.
And that shouldn't really be too much of
a surprise because it's also one of the
densest elements that we know.
Uh much denser than iron under normal
conditions. And so, actually, it would
be energetically favorable for any of
these heavy elements like uranium to
have sunk to the core under the force of
gravity. Uh that process of
differentiation should drive the densest
materials to the center. Of course,
that's offset by its chemical affinity
for the lighter elements. So, it's a bit
of a balance.
But, a significant amount of uranium in
the core could account for some of the
heat flow.
It could even potentially lead to a
natural nuclear reactor deep inside the
core. And that's really what I want to
talk about for the rest of this video.
In 2002, an article appeared in Discover
magazine entitled The Nuclear Planet and
talked about the possibility of a 5-mi
wide ball of uranium
right in the heart of the innermost core
of our planet.
Now, this wasn't the first time the idea
had popped up. It was proposed by J.
Marvin Herndon
in 1993,
the president of Transdyne Corp. in San
Diego, California. And he published a
paper on the feasibility of a nuclear
fission reactor at the center of the
Earth as an energy source for the
powering of the planet, the geomagnetic
field, and so forth.
The idea being that there would be an
inner inner core
right down in the center
where a ball of uranium had sunk.
A sort of subcore deep in the middle
there of uranium and other superdense
elements from the heavy end of the
periodic table.
And that possibly that was powering
nuclear reactions in this very deep
heart of our planet.
And this was taken up and modeled by Dan
Holland
of the Oak Ridge National
nuclear facility in America.
And he used computer software for
simulating this that simulates nuclear
reactors and ongoing nuclear reactions
in various conditions. And that was
published jointly between the two men in
September of 2001 in the National
Academy of Sciences. The
entitle was deep earth reactor nuclear
fission helium and the geomagnetic field
which is a bit of a mouthful.
The idea being that
fusion of uranium 235
could be occurring or could have
occurred deep inside the earth's core.
>> [snorts]
>> U-235
the less common version
of the uranium nucleus that being
normally U-238
but U-235 with a few less neutrons if
it's struck by a stray neutron can break
apart into lighter elements
so called fission and that releases a
huge amount of energy and the
process can then throw more neutrons off
which will create a sustaining chain
reaction if the density of U-235
is high enough.
Now
U-235 is pretty rare today but would
have been more common in the past
it's naturally slightly radioactive and
decayed during the period of the life of
the earth so there was more of it around
in earlier epochs.
So possibly
the density of U-235 might have
naturally become high enough in the core
of the earth certainly in early days to
generate
continuing or bursts of nuclear fusion.
One possibility is that it might have
occurred thousands of times in small
pockets where uranium isotopes happen to
have been concentrated inside the earth.
And we know that this is possible
because in 1972
a French team discovered the remains of
a natural underground nuclear reactor in
a uranium mine in the Gabon at a place
called Oklo, the Gabon being a small
republic in Africa marked on the map
there.
Now, this hadn't been active recently,
but half the age of the earth ago, 2
billion years back,
when there was probably four times the
amount of U-235 present, so much easier
to trigger and sustain reactions. And
it's thought that the conditions
existing deep in the earth with water
acting as a neutron moderator could well
have created
a natural nuclear reactor that ran. And
we know that this happened because we
can see in the rock the decay products
of that nuclear fission.
So,
nuclear fission s- sees the natural
U-235 split into other daughter nuclei.
Um it can form various different ones,
so it forms things like rubidium and
cesium as shown in the diagram here, but
it can also break up to create uh things
like um
barium and uh
uh xenon and other uh
combinations as long as the total adds
up to 92 protons and 235 neutrons minus
the fact that it spits out one, two,
three neutrons s- uh to get rid of the
neutron excess.
And if the natural uranium
238 that's mixed in with it picks up
those neutrons, them having been slowed
down enough to uh be able to be captured
by it, then the natural uranium acquires
an extra neutron and then spits out uh
an electron a couple of times turning
a neutron into a proton so the uranium
238 picks up a neutron and becomes
uranium 239
and then
does a conversion creating a proton out
of a neutron making neptunium 239 and
then plutonium 239 by doing it again.
And plutonium 239 is also fissile. It's
also able to pick up neutrons and split
and can act as a nuclear fuel. So, this
is known as a fast breeder process if
the conditions are right and there's
enough water around to slow down those
neutrons from the initial U-235
fission, they can have the right energy
to generate more fuel and breed
plutonium.
So, we think that that may well have
happened naturally certainly at Oklo,
but it's quite possible that it could
happen in other conditions deep in the
Earth.
Now,
helium
that we fill our party balloons with and
put to all sorts of other uses in
scientific cooling of equipment and a
whole range of processes
is quite rare on Earth.
And there was a puzzle as to where it
came from because it's a very light gas,
very unreactive and should be able to
escape to space.
Even if it was trapped within the Earth
during the formation of the planet,
the heat of the early Earth should have
seen it being
forced to the surface and outgassed and
then lost to space. So, it's a bit of a
surprise that we have any at all.
Some of it is generated in the upper
atmosphere by the action of cosmic rays,
particles of radiation from space,
causing
all sorts of nuclear reactions when they
collide with atoms and nuclei in the
upper atmosphere and sputtering off to
create alpha particles, which are the
nuclei of helium.
But,
we find it coming up within
uh oil wells and gas wells, and we get a
lot of the helium that we use from that
source. So, it's a bit strange.
Being a very unreactive gas, it tends to
just bubble up to the surface. And
again, we should lose it all.
Some of it is created by natural decay
of
radioactive elements, radioactive
uranium and other elements can decay
down to form stable lead, and in the
process repeatedly spit out alpha
particles, helium nuclei, and that can
accumulate and then find its way up out
of the Earth. And maybe that is the
source of the helium that we get from
our gas wells.
But,
there are two types of helium, two
isotopes, helium 3 with two protons and
a neutron, and the more common helium 4
with two neutrons and two protons.
So,
what do we find? Well,
we we find is that the volcanic gases
that seem to come up from the inside of
the earth contain too much helium 3 to
account for by the normal processes.
Certainly not the same that are produced
by cosmic rays by a factor of 30. That
tends to produce mostly helium 4 and
radioactive decay of heavy elements like
uranium puts out helium 4, not helium 3.
So, the small amount of helium 3 that we
do find is somewhat hard to explain.
We also find other things within the
gases that come from the deep
earth, the volcanic outpourings.
Beryllium isotope 10,
other noble gases like neon and argon
that really don't quite make very much
sense. They are too light and too
unreactive and should have been lost.
So, the question before us is where are
these coming from?
And so, really we need to find some
other ways to look down into the earth.
And one of those is to look for
the fleeting, hard-to-detect particles
called neutrinos, specifically the
anti-version of them, antineutrinos.
Because
when nuclei split in the nuclear fission
reaction of uranium,
one of the particles that comes out is
an antineutrino.
And we could perhaps look for that using
detectors like the IceCube nuclear
facility down at and the South Pole,
Antarctica. Lots of
detectors buried in a cubic kilometer of
ice looking for neutrinos from space or
coming up through the Earth.
And that, combined with a Japanese
KamLAND antineutrino detector, has been
doing just this. This is a large vat of
mineral oil lined with photomultipliers
looking for flashes of cosmic rays and
neutrinos and antineutrinos
coming from all directions.
So, what have we found? Well,
between March and November 2009,
they detected 841 antineutrinos.
They're very, very hard to detect, and
even though the flux of them is
enormous, they very rarely interact with
matter.
Of those 841,
730 were put down to nuclear reactors
on Earth that we are operating or just
general radioactive background radiation
or other events from space.
And 111
seem to be
down to uranium and thorium heavy metals
decaying inside the Earth.
So, by looking at that flux and
combining data, uh combining with
various experiments across the world
including some from Italy, we've been
able to try to estimate the contribution
to the overall heat budget from those
heavy elements decaying inside the
Earth.
And what it seems to be telling us
is that the radioactive decay from the
crust and the mantle, where we are
detecting most of this uranium and
thorium decay
is split like this. We get 8 terawatts
from U-238 decay, another eight from
thorium-232.
Actually, the light element potassium
isotope 40 adds another four terawatts
of heat to this, and the remaining
other isotopes, another three. So, we
can account for 23 terawatts of power
from what you might call natural
radioactive decay.
>> [snorts]
>> Now, that leaves 21 terawatts
unaccounted for. There are 44 coming out
from the Earth. We've counted 23 from
natural decay in the mantle and the
crust.
21 missing.
Now, it's probable that primordial heat
from all that gravitational
energy as the planet accreted
is where the rest of it is coming from,
but estimates leave some room for doubt.
And that georeactor theory of
uranium fission inside the subcore deep
in the Earth is only predicting three
terawatts. So, maybe that three is
hiding inside the 21 that's unaccounted
for. I certainly think there's room for
doubt and room for this as a
possibility.
Maybe more likely that this occurred
deep in the past of the Earth when there
was a lot more U-235 around. Maybe not
so common today, but it's still possible
that deep inside the core of the Earth
there is a subcore, a 5-mi wide ball of
uranium and heavy elements.
And with that
intriguing possibility, I will end this
particular video. I hope you found that
interesting.